भवत्प्रभावाविदुरा हि गोपास्तरुप्रपातादिकमत्र गोष्ठे ।
अहेतुमुत्पातगणं विशङ्क्य प्रयातुमन्यत्र मनो वितेनु: ॥१॥
भवत्-प्रभाव-	Thy glory
अविदुरा: हि गोपा:-	not knowing, so indeed, the Gopas
तरु-प्रपात-आदिकम्-	the trees' falling and other such (incidents)
अत्र गोष्ठे	here in Gokula
अहेतुम्-उत्पात-गणम्	unreasonable ill-omens
विशङ्क्य	suspecting
प्रयातुम्-अन्यत्र	to move, somewhere else
मन: वितेनु:	minds made up (decided)
The Gopas who were not aware of Thy glory and greatness, interpreted the falling of the trees and such other occurrences as unaccountable ill-omens. So they made up their minds and decided to migrate to some other place.
तत्रोपनन्दाभिधगोपवर्यो जगौ भवत्प्रेरणयैव नूनम् ।
इत: प्रतीच्यां विपिनं मनोज्ञं वृन्दावनं नाम विराजतीति ॥२॥
तत्र-उपनन्द-अभिध-	there, by the name of Upananda
गोपवर्य: जगौ	the leading Gopa said
भवत्-प्रेरणया-एव	by Thy prompting alone
नूनम्	certainly
इत: प्रतीच्याम्	from here to the West
विपिनं मनोज्ञं	a pleasant forest land
वृन्दावनं नाम	Vrindaavana by name
विराजति-इति	is situated, thus (he said)
Indeed by Thy prompting alone, a leading Gopa named Upananda brought to their notice the beautiful forest country side called Vrindaavana, situated to the west of Gokula, as a proper location for their settlement.
बृहद्वनं तत् खलु नन्दमुख्या विधाय गौष्ठीनमथ क्षणेन ।
त्वदन्वितत्वज्जननीनिविष्टगरिष्ठयानानुगता विचेलु: ॥३॥
बृहद्वनम् तत् खलु	Vrihadvana, that indeed
नन्द-मुख्या विधाय	Nanda and others making
गौष्ठीनम्-अथ	a cowshed then
क्षणेन	in no time
त्वत्-अन्वित-	carrying Thee
त्वत्-जननी-निविष्ट-	(and) Thy mother sitting
गरिष्ठ-यान-अनुगता	in the imposing vehicle, following
विचेलु:	proceeded
Nanda and the others soon abandoned the Vrihadvana settlement and made it as a cowshed. They proceeded following the imposing vehicle which was carrying Thee and in which Thy mother was sitting.
अनोमनोज्ञध्वनिधेनुपालीखुरप्रणादान्तरतो वधूभि: ।
भवद्विनोदालपिताक्षराणि प्रपीय नाज्ञायत मार्गदैर्घ्यम् ॥४॥
अन:-मनोज्ञ-ध्वनि-	of the cart, the pleasant sound
धेनु-पाली-	of the rows of the cows
खुर-प्रणाद-अन्तरत:	trampling of the hooves, interspersed,
वधूभि:	by the ladies
भवत्-विनोद-	Thy playfully
आलपित-अक्षराणि	spoken words
प्रपीय न-अज्ञायत	drinking in, did not feel
मार्ग-दैर्घ्यम्	the path's distance
The Gopikaas did not feel the distance of the path covered, as they were fully engrossed in Thy playful prattle. The pleasant sound of the cart was interspersed by the trampling sound of the hooves of the rows of the cows.
निरीक्ष्य वृन्दावनमीश नन्दत्प्रसूनकुन्दप्रमुखद्रुमौघम् ।
अमोदथा: शाद्वलसान्द्रलक्ष्म्या हरिन्मणीकुट्टिमपुष्टशोभम् ॥५॥
निरीक्ष्य वृन्दावनम्-	on seeing Vrindaavana
ईश	O Lord!
नन्दत्-प्रसून-	with flowers blossoming
कुन्द-प्रमुख-द्रुम-औघम्	mainly Kunda and clusters of trees
अमोदथा:	(Thou were) delighted
शाद्वल-सान्द्र-लक्ष्म्या	the thick grass with its intense beauty
हरिन्-मणी-कुट्टिम-	(as though) green emerald inlaid
पुष्ट-शोभम्	(hence) adding to the beauty
O Lord! Thou were delighted to see Vrindaavana. The Kunda flowers were in full bloom and there were clusters of trees all around. Its expansive grass lands had the intense beauty as though green emerald was inlaid.
नवाकनिर्व्यूढनिवासभेदेष्वशेषगोपेषु सुखासितेषु ।
वनश्रियं गोपकिशोरपालीविमिश्रित: पर्यगलोकथास्त्वम् ॥६॥
नवाक-निर्व्यूढ-	in the form of a half moon (semi circle), having built
निवास-भेदेषु-	the houses differently
अशेष-गोपेषु	when all the Gopas
सुख-आसितेषु	were sitting comfortably
वनश्रियं	the beauty of the forest
गोप-किशोर-पाली-	with the group of the young boys of the Gopas
विमिश्रित:	(Thou) mingling with them
पर्यक्-अलोकथा:-त्वम्	all around admiringly saw Thou
The Gopas built their new houses forming a semi-circle, and settled down there and were sitting peacefully and comfortably. Along with the young boys of the Gopas, Thou went about the whole place looking around admiringly, and enjoying the beauty of the forest.
अरालमार्गागतनिर्मलापां मरालकूजाकृतनर्मलापाम् ।
निरन्तरस्मेरसरोजवक्त्रां कलिन्दकन्यां समलोकयस्त्वम् ॥७॥
अराल-मार्ग-	in winding ways
आगत्-निर्मल-आपां	flowing with clear waters
मराल-कूज-	by the swans' cooings
आकृत-नर्म-लापाम्	making the river sound sweet
निरन्तर-स्मेर-	ever smiling
सरोज-वक्त्राम्	lotus faced
कलिन्द-कन्याम्	the daughter of Kalinda
समलोकय:-त्वम्	Thou saw
Thou saw the daughter of Kalinda, Kaalindi or Yamunaa river which was flowing with clear waters through winding ways. The echoes of the cooing of the swans enhanced the sweet sound of the river. The thick growth of the full blown lotuses was like her ever smiling face.
मयूरकेकाशतलोभनीयं मयूखमालाशबलं मणीनाम् ।
विरिञ्चलोकस्पृशमुच्चशृङ्गैर्गिरिं च गोवर्धनमैक्षथास्त्वम् ॥८॥
मयूर-केका-शत-	with the peacocks' many calls
लोभनीयं	(which was) resonant
मयूख-माला-शबलम्	by the rays of light's multi colored radiance
मणीनाम्	of the gems
विरिञ्च-लोक-	Brahma's abode
स्पृशम्-उच्च-शृङ्गै:	as though touching with its high peaks
गिरिम् च गोवर्धनम्-	and such a mountain Govardhana
ऐक्षथा:-त्वम्	saw Thou
Thou also saw the majestic Govardhana mountain. It was attractive by the resonant sound of the calls of the peacocks. It was radiant by the multi colored rays of the gems it contained. Its high peaks were as though touching the abode of Brahmaa.
समं ततो गोपकुमारकैस्त्वं समन्ततो यत्र वनान्तमागा: ।
ततस्ततस्तां कुटिलामपश्य: कलिन्दजां रागवतीमिवैकाम् ॥९॥
समं तत:	with, then,
गोपकुमारकै:-	the Gopa boys
त्वं समन्तत: यत्र	Thou all around where ever
वनान्तम्-आगा:	to the end of the forest went
तत:-तत:-	there, there
ताम् कुटिलाम्-	her winding
अपश्य: कलिन्दजाम्	Thou saw the river Yamunaa
रागवतीम्-इव-ऐकाम्	love-lorn like, in solitude
Then with the Gopa boys where ever Thou went, even to the end of the forest, Thou came across the winding course of the Yamunaa river, as though she was a love-lorn damsel, waiting to meet Thee in solitude.
तथाविधेऽस्मिन् विपिने पशव्ये समुत्सुको वत्सगणप्रचारे ।
चरन् सरामोऽथ कुमारकैस्त्वं समीरगेहाधिप पाहि रोगात् ॥१०॥
तथा-विधे-	in that kind of
अस्मिन् विपिने	this forest
पशव्ये	suited for the cattle
समुत्सुक:	very excited
वत्सगण-प्रचारे	in the calves's tending
चरन्-सराम:-अथ	moving about with Balaraama, then
कुमारकै:-त्वं	and with the young boys, Thou
समीरगेहाधिप	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
पाहि रोगात्	protect me from illness
Thou then with Balaraam and the other young boys with great excitement tended the calves in this forest which was well suited for the cattle. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Protect me from illness.